





= Introduction

The typst-theorems package provides Typst functions that help create
numbered theorem environments. This is heavily inspired by the \newtheorem
functionality of LaTeX.

A theorem environment lets you wrap content together with automatically
updating numbering information. Such environments use internal state
counters for this purpose. Environments can

- share the same counter (Theorems and Lemmas often do so)
- keep a global count, or be attached to
  - other environments (Corollaries are often numbered based upon the parent Theorem)
  - headings
- have a numbering level depth fixed (for instance, use only top level heading
  numbers)
- be referenced elsewhere in the document, via labels


= Using typst-theorems

Import all functions provided by typst-theorems using
RAW_BLOCK
The second line is crucial for displaying thmenvs and references correctly!

The core of this module consists of thmenv.
The functions thmbox, thmplain, and thmproof provide some simple
defaults for the appearance of thmenvs.


= Feature demonstration 

Create box-like theorem environments using thmbox, a wrapper around
thmenv which provides some simple defaults.

RAW_BLOCK


Such definitions are convenient to place in the preamble or a template; use
the environment in your document via
RAW_BLOCK

This produces the following.

  There are infinitely many primes.
 

Note that the name is optional. This theorem environment will be numbered
based on its parent heading counter, with successive theorems
automatically updating the final index.

The <euclid> label can be used to refer to this Theorem via the reference
@euclid. Go to REF to read more.

You can create another environment which uses the same counter, say for
Lemmas, as follows.

RAW_BLOCK


  If MATH divides both MATH and MATH, it also divides MATH.


You can attach other environments to ones defined earlier. For instance,
Corollaries can be created as follows.

RAW_BLOCK



  If MATH divides two consecutive natural numbers, then MATH.


Note that we have provided a numbering string; this can be any valid
numbering pattern as described in the
numbering
documentation.


== Proofs

The thmproof function gives nicer defaults for formatting proofs.
RAW_BLOCK


of REF
  Suppose to the contrary that MATH is a finite enumeration
  of all primes. Set MATH. Since MATH is not in our list,
  it cannot be prime. Thus, some prime factor MATH divides MATH.  Since
  MATH also divides MATH, it must divide the difference MATH, a
  contradiction.


If your proof ends in a block equation, or a list/enum, you can place
qedhere to correctly position the qed symbol.
RAW_BLOCK

  There are arbitrarily long stretches of composite numbers.


  For any MATH, consider MATH


Caution: The qedhere symbol does not play well with numbered/multiline
equations!

You can set a custom qed symbol (say MATH) by setting the appropriate
option in thmrules as follows.
RAW_BLOCK

== Suppressing numbering
Supplying numbering: none to an environment suppresses numbering for that
block, and prevents it from updating its counter.

RAW_BLOCK



  The numbers MATH, MATH, and MATH are prime.


Here, we have used the thmplain function, which is identical to thmbox but
sets some plainer defaults. You can also write
RAW_BLOCK

  The square of any even number is divisible by MATH.


  The square of any odd number is one more than a multiple of MATH.


Note that the last Lemma is not numbered 3.1.2!

You can also override the automatic numbering as follows.
RAW_BLOCK

  The square of any natural number cannot be two more than a multiple of 4.


Note that this does not affect the counters either!


== Limiting depth

You can limit the number of levels of the base numbering used as follows.
RAW_BLOCK


  A natural number is called a prime number if it is greater than MATH and
  cannot be written as the product of two smaller natural numbers. 


Note that this environment is not numbered 3.2.1!

RAW_BLOCK

  A natural number is called a composite number if it is greater than MATH
  and not prime.


Setting a base_level higher than what base provides will introduce padded
zeroes.

RAW_BLOCK

  The numbers MATH, MATH, and MATH are composite.



== Custom formatting
The thmbox function lets you specify rules for formatting the title, the
name, and the body individually. Here, the title refers to the head
and number together.

RAW_BLOCK

     MATH
  


  All even natural numbers greater than 2 are composite.


  Every even natural number MATH can be written as the product of the natural
  numbers MATH and MATH. When MATH, both of these are smaller than MATH
  itself.


You can go even further and use the thmenv function directly. It accepts an
identifier, a base, a base_level, and a fmt function.
RAW_BLOCK

                                   Notation () 
    
          

  The variable MATH is reserved for prime numbers.


  The variable MATH is reserved for real numbers.


Note that the color: green named argument supplied to the theorem
environment gets passed to the fmt function. In general, all extra named
arguments supplied to the theorem will be passed to fmt.
On the other hand, the positional argument "for Reals" will always be
interpreted as the name argument in fmt.

RAW_BLOCK

  All multiples of 3 greater than 3 are composite.


Here, we override the title (which defaults to the head) as well as the
stroke in the fmt produced by thmbox. All block arguments can be
overridden in thmbox environments in this way.


== Labels and references 

You can place a <label> outside a theorem environment, and reference it
later via @ references! For example, go back to REFtypst
Recall that there are infinitely many prime numbers via REF

    Recall that there are infinitely many prime numbers via REF


RAW_BLOCK

    You can reference future environments too, like REFCor.

RAW_BLOCK

  All primes apart from MATH and MATH are of the form MATH.
 

You can modify the supplement and numbering to be used in references, like REFCaution: Links created by references to thmenvs will be styled according
to #show link: rules.


== Overriding base

RAW_BLOCK



  There are infinitely many composite numbers.


  All primes greater than MATH are odd.
 

  Two is a lone prime.


This remark environment, which would normally be attached to the current
heading, now uses the corollary as a base.




= Function reference
== thmenv

The thmenv function produces a theorem environment.
RAW_BLOCK

The fmt function must accept a theorem name, number, body, and produce
formatted content. It may also accept additional positional arguments, via
args.

A theorem environment is itself a map of the following form.
RAW_BLOCK

Positional arguments in args are as follows
- name: The name of the theorem, typically displayed after the title.

All additional named arguments in args will be passed on to the associated
fmt function supplied in thmenv.


== thmbox and thmplain

The thmbox wraps thmenv, supplying a box-like fmt function.
RAW_BLOCK

The thmbox function sets the following defaults for the block.
RAW_BLOCK

The thmplain function is identical to thmbox, except with plainer
defaults.

RAW_BLOCK


== thmproof, proof-bodyfmt and qedhere

The thmproof function is identical to thmplain, except with defaults
appropriate for proofs.

RAW_BLOCK

The proof-bodyfmt function is a bodyfmt function that automatically places
a qed symbol at the end of the body.

You can place #qedhere inside a block equation, or at the end of a list/enum
item to place the qed symbol on the same line.


== thmrules

The thmrules show rule sets important styling rules for theorem
environments, references, and equations in proofs.

RAW_BLOCK


= Acknowledgements

Thanks to
- MJHutchinson for suggesting and
  implementing the base_level and base: none features,
- rmolinari for suggesting and
  implementing the separator: ... feature,
- DVDTSB for contributing
  - the idea of passing named arguments from the theorem directly to the fmt
    function.
  - the number: ... override feature.
  - the title: ... override feature in thmbox.
- The awesome devs of typst.app for their
  support.